In the ancient kingdom of Mahishmathi, a woman carrying a baby falls into a waterfall and breathes her last, but before dying, she holds the baby in one hand above her head. The baby is rescued by local villagers and adopted by Sanga (Rohini) and her husband. Named Shivudu, (Prabhas) he grows up to be a strong, adventurous young man who is curious about the waterfall and the land beyond. After finding a wooden mask on the ground, he is driven to find the owner of the mask and succeeds in climbing the waterfall. The mask belongs to Avanthika (Tamannaah), a rebellious warrior of a group led by Devasena's brother engaged in guerrilla warfare against Emperor Bhallaladeva (Rana Daggubati) of Mahishmati to rescue their former queen Devasena (Anushka Shetty). Avantika is given the opportunity to rescue the queen. She falls in love with Shivudu after finding out that he climbed the waterfall for her. Shivudu pledges to help her in her mission and sneaks into Mahishmati to rescue Devasena.Shivudu manages to flee with Devasena, but is chased down by Bhallaladeva's son, Bhadrah (Adivi Sesh) and the loyal soldier Kattappa (Sathyaraj). After Shivudu beheads Bhadrah, Kattappa drops his weapon, realizing that Shivudu is Mahendra Baahubali, the son of late king Amarendra Baahubali. He narrates the story of Amarendra's past. Amarendra's father had died long ago, while his mother died giving birth to him. His uncle Bhijjaladeva (Nassar) was deemed unfit to rule due to his crooked nature, however, he believes he was denied the throne due to the fact that one of his arms is disabled. Bijjaladeva's wife Sivagami assumed control of the kingdom with Kattappa's assistance until a new king could be selected. Amarendra was brought up together with Bijjaladeva and Sivagami's son Bhallaladeva. Both young men were trained in arts, science, disguise, politics, and warfare, but they had different approaches towards kingship. While Amarendra was gracious and loved his countrymen, Bhallaladeva was violent and achieved his goals by any means possible.It was then discovered that Mahishmati was about to be attacked by an army of savages called Kalakeyas. Pingaladeva proposed that the prince who killed the Kalakeya king Inkoshi would be the future king of Mahishmati to which Sivagami and the chief minister agrees. Inkoshi rejected Sivagami's offer of peace and insulted her by saying he will have children with her. An enraged Sivagami ordered that his limbs be chopped off and body fed to the vultures. While Bhallaladeva used sophisticated weapons given by Pingaladeva, Amarendra used simple yet effective tactics. As Amarendra was about to slay the king, Bhallaladeva swung his weapon from a distance and killed him. Sivagami announced Amarendra as the new emperor despite Bhallaladeva killing the king because of the fact that he shielded and protected his own countrymen throughout the war.When asked about Amarendra's current whereabouts, a tearful Kattappa reveals that Amarendra is dead and that he is the one who killed him.Kattappa continues to narrate how he ended up killing Amarendra Baahubali.After vanquishing the Kalakeyas, Amarendra Baahubali is declared as the future king of Mahishmati and Bhallaladeva its commander-in-chief. The Rajamatha Sivagami orders Amarendra to tour the kingdom and its neighbourhood, along with Kattappa. During the tour, Amarendra witnesses an attack by Devasena, the princess of Kuntala, a kingdom neighbouring Mahishmati. Falling in love with her, he approaches her after the fight, posing as a simpleton and an orphan and Kattappa plays a role as his uncle, and is accepted into the royal palace for a job.Bhallaladeva receives a message of Amarendra's act and upon viewing Devasena's portrait, lusts for her. He asks Sivagami for Devasena's hand in marriage. The Rajamata, who was unaware of Amarendra's feelings for Devasena, assures Bhallaladeva and sends an emissary to Kuntala, who delivers the marriage proposal in a patronising way. An insulted Devasena rejects the proposal with a scathing reply. Enraged hearing her response, Sivagami sends an order to Amarendra that Devasena be brought to Mahishmati as a captive.Meanwhile, Kuntala is attacked by Pindaris, a dacoit-like army. Amarendra, with the help of Kattappa, Devasena's maternal cousin, Kumara Varma, is able to nullify the attack and save Kuntala. Upon being questioned, Amarendra reveals his true identity. He receives a bird post from Mahishmati, ordering him to take Devasena as captive. He promises Devasena that he will protect her honour and convinces her to come with him to Mahishmati as his future bride.Upon reaching Mahishmati, the misunderstanding is brought to light and when an ultimatum is delivered to Amarendra that he must either choose the throne or Devasena, he chooses the latter. Bhallaladeva is crowned king and Amarendra is made the new commander-in-chief. This, however, does not impact Amarendra's popularity among the people. During Devasena's baby shower, Bhallaladeva rids Amarendra of his duties as a "gift" and offers them to Sethupathi. Devasena speaks out against Sivagami's inaction and taunts Bhallaladeva. Due to further clashes (An altercation between Devasena and Sethupathi), Amarendra and Devasena are banished from the royal palace, living happily among the people.Bijjaladeva convinces Kumara Varma that Bhallaladeva is after Amarendra's life and he must kill the king to safeguard his brother-in-law. Kumara Varma enters the palace in the stealth of the night, only to be discovered by Bhallaladeva and be killed, but not before revealing their plot to convince Sivagami to kill Amarendra due to the people's continuing respect for him. Sivagami, convinced that Bhallaladeva's life is under threat but that open hostility would result in civil war, orders Kattappa to assassinate Amarendra. Kattappa, bound by his word to serve the Queen, lures Amarendra by feigning he is in trouble, and then stabs him in the back and kills him.After Amarendra's death, Kattappa soon learns of Bhallaladeva's treachery and informs Sivagami, who reveals to the panicked hordes outside her palace that Amarendra is dead and that the baby Mahendra Baahubali would ascend the throne. As Bhallaladeva and his men are about to seize the queen, she flees with the new King but falls into a river after being hit by an arrow shot by Bhallaladeva. As Bhallaladeva holds Devasena prisoner for the next 25 years and destroys Kuntala, Mahendra grows up and leads the rebel group that has indulged in guerrilla warfare against King Bhallaladeva.
After listening to the whole story, Mahendra Baahubali (alias Sivudu) decides to avenge his father's death by raising his own army with the help of Kattappa and returns to Mahishmati along with Avantika and the people of the city. After an ensuing battle, Bhallaladeva is defeated by Mahendra and burnt alive on a pyre prepared by Devasena. Ending the cruel regime of Bhallaladeva, Mahendra becomes the new King with Avantika as his queen, bringing peace and harmony to Mahishmati.