Globalization is the way to open businesses, improve technological growth, economy, etc on international level for the international players. It is the way to manufacturers and producers of the products or goods to sell their products globally without any restriction. It provides huge profit to the businessmen as they get low cost labor in poor countries easily through the globalization. It provides a big opportunity to the companies to deal with the worldwide market. It facilitates any country to participate, set up or merge industries, invest in equity or shares, selling of products or services in any country.Globalization helps global market to consider whole world as a single market. Traders are extending their areas of business by focusing world as a global village. Earlier to the 1990s, there was restriction of importing certain products which were already manufactured in India like agricultural products, engineering goods, food items, toiletries, etc. However, during 1990s there was a pressure from rich countries over World Trade Organization, World Bank (engaged in development financing activities), and International Monetary Fund to allow other countries to spread their businesses by opening trade and market in the poor and developing countries. In India the globalization and liberalization process was started in 1991 under the Union Finance Minister (Manmohan Singh).After many years, globalization has brought major revolution in the Indian market when multinational brands came to India like PepsiCo, KFC, Mc. Donald, Boomer Chewing gums, IBM, Nokia, Ericsson, Aiwa etc and started delivering wide range of quality products at cheap prices. All the dominating brands shown real revolution of globalization here as a tremendous boost to the industrial sector economy. Prices of the quality products are getting down because of the cut throat competition running in the market.Globalization and liberalization of the businesses in the Indian market is flooding the quality foreign products however affecting the local Indian industries adversely to a great extent resulting in the job loss of poor and uneducated workers. Globalization has been bonanza for the consumers however grave for the small-scale Indian producers.Globalization has affected the Indian students and education sectors to a great extent by making available study books and huge information over internet. Collaboration of foreign universities with the Indian universities has brought a huge change in the education industry.Health sectors are also affected a lot by the globalization of common medicines, health monitoring electronic machines, etc.Globalization of trade in the agricultural sector has brought variety of quality seeds having disease resistance property. However it is not good for the poor Indian farmers because of costly seeds and agricultural technologies.It has brought a huge revolution to the employment sector by the spread of businesses like cottage, handloom, carpet, artisans and carving, ceramic, jewellery, and glassware etc.Globalization has brought variety of affordable priced quality products and overall economic benefits to the developing countries as well as employment to the large population. However, it has given rise to the competition, crime, anti-national activities, terrorism etc. So, together with the happiness it has brought some sadness also.