In 1890s London, Robert Angier and Alfred Borden work as shills for a magician, under the mentorship of John Cutter, an engineer who designs stage magic. In one trick, Angier's wife, Julia, is to escape from a water tank while tied up. Julia fails to escape during one performance and drowns. Angier, devastated, accuses Borden of using a riskier knot, causing her death. The two become bitter enemies.Angier and Borden launch their own magic careers. Borden develops a trick he calls the Transported Man, in which he appears to travel instantly between two wardrobes on opposite ends of the stage. Unable to discern Borden's method, Angier hires a double, Gerald Root, to perform his own version of the trick. The imitation is a greater success, but Angier is dissatisfied, as he ends the trick hidden under the stage while Root basks in the applause.Angier has his assistant Olivia spy on Borden to learn how he performs the Transported Man. However, Olivia falls in love with Borden and becomes his assistant. With her help, Borden sabotages Angier's act. Confronted by Angier, Olivia gives him a copy of Borden's encoded diary. Angier decodes it after forcing the keyword "TESLA" from Borden by threatening to kill Borden's stage engineer, Fallon.The diary takes him to America to meet scientist Nikola Tesla, whom Angier believes built a machine for Borden. Tesla denies this, and Angier realizes the diary is fraudulent, created as a distraction. Despite this, Tesla agrees to build the machine for Angier. However, instead of teleporting objects, his creation duplicates anything placed inside it a distance away from the machine. Tesla is eventually driven from Colorado Springs by agents of his rival, Thomas Alva Edison, but as he leaves he has the machine delivered to Angier. In an attached letter, he advises Angier to destroy it, stating that it will bring him nothing but misery.Borden's wife, Sarah, is driven to suicide by his contradictory personality. Borden reveals to Olivia that he never loved Sarah intentionally and that he loves her more. Fed up with the feud between Borden and Angier, Olivia leaves. In London, Angier debuts the Real Transported Man using Tesla's machine, appearing to have teleported across the theater. Borden sneaks backstage and witnesses Angier fall through a trapdoor and drown in a tank. He is discovered by Cutter and turned over to the police. Unable to prove his innocence, Borden is found guilty of murder and sentenced to death.In prison, Borden is visited by an agent of Lord Caldlow, who offers to care for Borden's daughter Jess in exchange for Borden's tricks. Borden agrees. Caldlow reveals that he is Angier and Borden begs for his life, giving him all his secrets to his tricks but Angier rips them into pieces and says that his are better before leaving with Jess. When Cutter realizes that Angier is still alive, he is disgusted that he allowed Borden to be sentenced, but agrees to help him dispose of Tesla's machine. Borden is hanged for Angier's murder.Angier goes back to the theater. A stranger enters and shoots Angier, revealing himself as Borden. Angier discovers Borden was a pair of identical twins, sharing an identity. Borden explains he and his brother performed the original Transported man together, and that whenever one was "Borden", the other was disguised as "Fallon"; the surviving twin loved Sarah while his brother had loved Olivia. Whereas in Angier's trick using the machine Tesla made for him, every performance created a new Angier, while the original one drowned in a tank beneath the stage. Angier dies and drops his lantern, setting the theater on fire. Borden leaves and picks up Jess at Cutter's workshop. In the burning theater, the fire light reveals rows of tanks holding dead Angiers.