Puppies try to jump at anything and everything during their first year of life. It is worth knowing that this behavior will remain the same when the puppy grows into am adult dog. If you want your dog to keep on jumping on guests, then it is fine to let the puppy jump at you on every occasion. Better way is to reward the puppy and punish for desired behavior. When the puppy is jumping at you, neglect this behavior. Make the puppy sit on the floor and offer a reward. Over a period of time puppy will realize the benefit of sitting in front of you and therefore will forget the tendency of jumping at people. This will be to your great advantage when the puppy grows and becomes a sort of serious dog.Punishment to the puppy should not be treated as punishment, but correction in behavior. It is important to correct puppy's behavior at the time of any offence committed by the puppy. Never correct him after a time gap. Fir example, if you don't want your puppy to start barking the moment doorbell rings, correct him immediately. If you try to correct him after the guests are gone, he may get confused. Once this unwanted behavior is corrected, never forget to reward the puppy for the correct behavior. This reward may not necessarily in the form of food only. You may show your happiness over the behavior and your dog is intelligent enough to know your good mood.Get a good number of toys for your puppy to chew. Never allow him to bite or chew your hand. If the puppy bites your hand, make a huge noise to make puppy understand his mistake. Don't try to punish the puppy for this behavior. Walk away from the place and don't let him near you for some time. Puppy will understand this clearly and never try to repeat that mistake. Handful of chewable toys will do this trick easily.
Try not to leave the puppies unattended in a room. Puppies because of their natural tendency of chewing, will mess up with valuable articles in the room. If you scold him for this, he may not understand the reasons of your behavior. Leave it there itself, and then never ever leave him unattended.
Puppies may feel sick when taken on a long drive. Start training your puppy in the car for shorter distances first and then keep on increasing the trip time and miles. Puppy will get adjusted to long hours in the car.